

===== PAGE 1 =====

Curriculum & Evaluation Scheme: CS, Computer Engineering and CSE (V & VI Semester) 13 
 
 
DR. A.P.J. ABDUL KALAM TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY, UTTAR PRADESH, LUCKNOW 
 
Object Oriented System Design with C++ (BCS054) 
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL) 
At the end of course , the student will be able to: 
CO 1 To Understand the application development and analyze the insights of object oriented 
programming to implement application 
K2, K4 
CO 2 To Understand, analyze and apply the role of overall modeling concepts (i.e. System, structural) K2, K3 
CO 3 To Understand, analyze and apply oops concepts (i.e. abstraction, inheritance) K2, K3, K4 
CO 4 To know the concepts of C++ for understanding the implementation of object oriented concepts K2, K3 
CO 5 To understand and apply object oriented paradigm concepts to implement real world problems. K2, K3 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-0-0 
Unit Topic Proposed 
Lecture 
 
I 
Introduction: The meaning of Object Orientation, object identity, Encapsulation, information hiding, 
polymorphism, generosity, importance of modelling, principles of modelling, object oriented 
modelling, Introduction to UML, conceptual model of the UML, Architecture. 
 
08 
 
 
 
II 
Basic Structural Modeling: Classes, Relationships, common Mechanisms, and diagrams. Class 
&Object Diagrams: Terms, concepts, modelling techniques for Class & Object Diagrams. 
Collaboration Diagrams: Terms, Concepts, depicting a message, polymorphism in collaboration 
Diagrams, iterated messages, use of self in messages. Sequence Diagrams: Terms, concepts, depicting 
asynchronous messages with/without priority, call-back mechanism, broadcast messages. 
Basic Behavioural Modeling: Use cases, Use case Diagrams, Activity Diagrams, State Machine , 
Process and thread, Event and signals, Time diagram, interaction diagram, Package diagram. 
Architectural Modeling: Component, Deployment, Component diagrams and Deployment diagrams. 
 
 
 
08 
 
 
 
III 
Object Oriented Analysis: Object oriented design, Object design, Combining three models, Designing 
algorithms, design optimization, Implementation of control, Adjustment of inheritance, Object 
representation, Physical packaging, Documenting design considerations. 
Structured analysis and structured design (SA/SD), Jackson Structured Development 
(JSD).Mapping object oriented concepts using non -object oriented language, Translating classes into 
data structures, Passing arguments to methods, Implementing inheritance, associations encapsulation. 
Object oriented programming style: reusability, extensibility, robustness, programming in the large. 
Procedural v/s OOP, Object oriented language features. Abstraction and Encapsulation. 
 
 
 
08 
 
IV 
C++ Basics : Overview, Program structure, namespace, identifiers, variables, constants, enum, 
operators, typecasting, control structures 
C++ Functions : Simple functions, Call and Return by reference, Inline functions, Macro Vs. Inline 
functions, Overloading of functions, default arguments, friend functions, virtual functions 
 
08 
 
 
V 
Objects and Classes : Basics of object and class in C++, Private and public members, static data and 
function members, constructors and their types, destructors, operator overloading, type conversion. 
Inheritance : Concept of Inheritance, types of inheritance: single, multiple, multilevel, hierarchical, 
hybrid, protected members, overriding, virtual base class 
Polymorphism : Pointers in C++, Pointes and Objects, this pointer, virtual and pure virtual 
functions, Implementing polymorphism 
 
 
08 
Text Books 
1. James Rumbaugh et. al, “Object Oriented Modeling and Design”, 2nd Edition Pearson Education 
2. Grady Booch, James Rumbaugh, Ivar Jacobson, “The Unified Modeling Language User Guide”, Pearson 
Education 
3. Object Oriented Programming With C++, E Balagurusamy, McGraw-Hill Education 
4. C++ Programming, Black Book, Steven Holzner, dreamtech 
5. Object Oriented Programming in Turbo C++, Robert Lafore, Galgotia 
6. Object Oriented Programming with ANSI and Turbo C++, Ashok Kamthane, Pearson 
7. The Compete Reference C++, Herbert Schlitz, McGraw-Hill Education 